# Instant-runoff Vote Decider
The IRV Voting project is a Python program designed to quickly determine the results of votes of any size using Instant-runoff method (aka Ranked Choice Voting). The original script, contained in the file _insert main.py filename here_, was designed to quickly process data from a .csv file and return the results, clarifying the process. Using simple collection methods like a standard Google Form, the results can be quickly returned, exported, and analyzed.

The program asks the user to type the name of a file ending in .csv to be opened and will error and loop if not typed correctly. Afterwards, it reads the file into a Pandas dataframe runs every round very quickly, printing the candidates, number of votes, percentages, removals, and results to the console. 

# What is Instant-runoff Voting?
Instant-runoff Voting, also known as Ranked Choice Voting, is an electoral system that allows voters to rank the candidates in preferential order. In every round where no candidate reaches a majority, the candidates in last place are eliminated and their votes are redistributed. If voters' first choices are eliminated, their ballot counts for the second, then third, and so on. This helps ensure that the winning candidate has the trust of the most people possible, and gives every candidate a fair shot. This program was written according to the rules [at FairVote.org.](https://fairvote.org/our-reforms/ranked-choice-voting-information/#how-rcv-worksnbsp) 

However, certain issues can arise when it comes to ties. When a tie for first place is encountered between the final candidates, there are two options used: 1) determine the winner by who received the most first choice votes or 2) hold a special election with the two leading candidates. When a tie for last place is encountered, there are more scenarios to consider. If the total votes attributed to the tied candidates do not exceed the next-lowest candidate, you can remove them all in a single step ([like San Francisco](https://votingsystems.cdn.sos.ca.gov/vendors/ess/ess-rcv-staff-report-2006-10-final.pdf)); otherwise, randomly select one and remove it ([like Maine](https://legislature.maine.gov/statutes/21-A/title21-Asec723-A.html), or [Boulder, CO](https://bouldercolorado.gov/guide/ranked-choice-voting-guide)); another option yet is to compare the support of the tied candidates from earlier rounds, like [this proposed Massachussetts law](https://www.mass.gov/doc/19-10-final-summary/download). 

There are many possible options, and all are acceptable as long as they are agreed upon prior. Here, I've implemented random elimination for ties in last place. (When I get a chance, I'll try to update it to match [this statute from Benton, OR.](https://www.co.benton.or.us/sites/default/files/fileattachments/elections_amp_passports/page/6996/adopted_rules_for_ranked_choice_voting.pdf))

# Why?
This project was created to simplify the voting process within a student organization at my university. This year, members were told the election would be decided with ranked choice voting, and voted accordingly. When votes were tallied, a discrepancy was raised in the count for the highest position, and the club board overruled the ranked choice style to assign point values to an already flawed collection of votes. While the original method selected one member, the new re-elected the incumbent. This code was written to standardize the process and ensure that this won't happen again.
